Welcome to Anaesthesia Compendium. Today's viva station: the anaesthetic machine.
I shall take the candidate through it, question by question. Let us begin.
Let us begin. What is the function of the continuous-flow anaesthetic machine,
and what are its essential components?
The continuous-flow anaesthetic machine is the device that receives medical gases
at high or pipeline pressure, allows the anaesthetist to select and accurately
meter a mixture of those gases at a controlled flow and oxygen concentration,
adds a measured concentration of volatile anaesthetic vapour,
and delivers the resulting fresh gas mixture safely to the breathing system and the
patient.
Its essential function, therefore, is the controlled and safe preparation and
delivery of an anaesthetic gas mixture. The essential components,
following the path of the gas, are as follows.
There are gas inlets for the pipeline supplies and for reserve cylinders,
with pressure regulators to reduce and stabilise the pressure.
There are flow-control valves and flowmeters to meter each gas accurately,
arranged with safety devices to prevent a hypoxic mixture.
There is a back bar carrying one or more vaporisers to add volatile agent.
There is an oxygen flush to deliver pure oxygen rapidly, bypassing the vaporisers.
The mixture leaves by a common gas outlet to the breathing system.
Throughout are built-in safety features — the oxygen failure alarm,
the anti-hypoxia linkage, pressure-relief valves and non-return valves — and modern
machines integrate the ventilator, the scavenging and extensive monitoring.
The machine may be pneumatic and mechanical in its traditional form,
or electronically controlled in modern designs.
So the anaesthetic machine receives,
meters and mixes medical gases at a controlled flow and oxygen concentration,
adds volatile vapour, and delivers the fresh gas safely to the patient,
comprising gas inlets and regulators, flowmeters with anti-hypoxia safeguards,
a vaporiser back bar, an oxygen flush, a common gas outlet, and integral safety,
ventilation and monitoring.
Describe the pressure systems within the machine — high,
intermediate and low pressure.
It is helpful to think of the anaesthetic machine as comprising three pressure
regions, because the components and safety devices differ between them,
and this framework organises an understanding of the gas pathway.
The high-pressure system comprises the parts exposed to the full,
variable pressure of the reserve cylinders — the cylinder,
its yoke with the pin index and a non-return valve, the cylinder pressure gauge,
and the inlet to the pressure regulator;
here the pressure may be as high as one hundred and thirty-seven bar for oxygen,
and the regulator reduces it.
The intermediate-pressure system comprises the parts at the regulated working
pressure of about four bar — the pipeline inlets,
the gas downstream of the cylinder regulators,
the pressure gauges for the pipeline supply, the oxygen flush,
and the supply to the flow-control valves;
this is the pressure at which gas is supplied steadily to the metering components,
and it is the pressure at which the oxygen failure alarm and the anti-hypoxia gas
supply devices operate.
The low-pressure system comprises the parts downstream of the flow-control valves —
the flowmeter tubes, the back bar and vaporisers,
and the path to the common gas outlet — where the pressure is only a little above
atmospheric, the gas now metered and flowing to the patient;
here the back bar pressure-relief valve protects against excessive pressure.
So the machine has a high-pressure system at variable cylinder pressure up to one
hundred and thirty-seven bar, an intermediate-pressure system at the regulated four
bar supplying the metering components and safety devices,
and a low-pressure system downstream of the flow valves at near-atmospheric
pressure carrying the metered gas through the vaporisers to the outlet — a
framework that organises the components and their safeguards.
Explain the function of the pressure regulators and why they are needed.
Pressure regulators, also called reducing valves,
are essential components of the anaesthetic machine wherever gas is taken from the
high-pressure cylinders, and their function, though touched on previously,
is worth setting in the context of the machine.
A cylinder delivers gas at a high pressure that falls as the cylinder empties — up
to one hundred and thirty-seven bar for a full oxygen cylinder.
This pressure is far too high to supply directly to the delicate flow-control and
metering components, and its variability would make accurate metering impossible.
The regulator reduces this high, variable pressure to a lower,
constant working pressure of about four bar, matching the pipeline pressure,
and holds it steady regardless of the falling cylinder pressure.
It does this by balancing the downstream gas pressure, acting on a diaphragm,
against an adjustable spring, so that the valve opens and closes to maintain the
set downstream pressure. Several benefits follow.
The metering of gas by the flow-control valves becomes accurate and stable,
since the supply pressure is constant. The downstream components are protected from
the high cylinder pressure.
The flow does not change as the cylinder empties,
so the anaesthetist need not continually readjust it.
Regulators incorporate a safety relief valve to vent excess pressure should they
fail. A second-stage regulator may further stabilise the pressure before the
flowmeters.
So the pressure regulators reduce the high,
variable cylinder pressure to a constant working pressure of about four bar,
enabling accurate and stable metering, protecting downstream components,
and keeping flow steady as the cylinder empties,
with a safety valve against failure — essential wherever cylinder gas is used.
Describe the flowmeters and the arrangement that prevents a hypoxic mixture.
The flowmeters, with their flow-control valves,
are the components by which the anaesthetist accurately meters each gas,
and their arrangement incorporates a crucial safeguard against delivering a hypoxic
mixture.
Each gas passes through a needle valve, the flow-control valve,
opened by the anaesthetist, and then through its flowmeter,
traditionally a variable-orifice rotameter — a tapered glass tube with a bobbin
that rises to a height indicating the flow against a calibrated, gas-specific scale.
The flowmeters for the different gases are arranged side by side,
their outputs combining into a common manifold that leads to the back bar.
The arrangement is designed to prevent a hypoxic mixture in two ways.
First, the oxygen flowmeter is positioned so that its gas enters the common
manifold downstream of, or last among,
the other gases — nearest the manifold outlet — so that if a flowmeter tube leaks
or cracks, oxygen is least likely to be lost and the patient is less likely to
receive a hypoxic mixture.
Second, an anti-hypoxia device mechanically or pneumatically links the oxygen and
nitrous oxide flow controls so that the proportion of oxygen cannot fall below a
minimum, usually about twenty-five per cent:
increasing nitrous oxide automatically increases oxygen,
or limits the nitrous oxide, by a chain-link or pneumatic mechanism.
Modern electronic machines achieve the same by software control of electronic gas
mixers, with an oxygen analyser as a final check.
So gases are metered by flow-control valves and flowmeters,
the oxygen flowmeter placed last in the manifold to minimise hypoxia from leaks,
and an anti-hypoxia device links oxygen and nitrous oxide to prevent the oxygen
proportion falling below a safe minimum — safeguards against the delivery of a
hypoxic mixture.
What is the back bar, and how are vaporisers mounted upon it?
The back bar is the part of the anaesthetic machine, downstream of the flowmeters,
that carries the vaporisers and conveys the fresh gas mixture from the flowmeter
manifold to the common gas outlet, and the mounting of vaporisers upon it
incorporates important safety features.
The metered gas mixture from the flowmeters passes along the back bar,
through any vaporiser that is switched on, where it picks up volatile agent,
and then to the common gas outlet.
Vaporisers are mounted on the back bar by a standardised mounting system,
commonly the Selectatec system, which allows vaporisers to be attached and removed
without tools and ensures a gas-tight seating.
A key safety feature of the mounting is an interlock mechanism that prevents more
than one vaporiser being switched on at a time,
so that the patient cannot receive a mixture of two agents,
and that secures the vaporiser in place.
The vaporisers are agent-specific and keyed so that each can only be filled with
its correct agent. The back bar carries a pressure-relief valve that opens to
protect the system and the patient should the pressure rise excessively,
for instance from an obstruction downstream.
Non-return arrangements reduce the back-pressure effects that can alter vaporiser
output. In modern machines the vaporiser may be an integral electronically
controlled injection device rather than a mounted plenum vaporiser.
So the back bar carries the fresh gas from the flowmeters through the vaporisers to
the common gas outlet, mounting the vaporisers by a standardised system such as
Selectatec with an interlock preventing more than one being on at once,
agent-specific keying, and a pressure-relief valve protecting against excessive
pressure.
Explain the oxygen flush and the common gas outlet.
The oxygen flush and the common gas outlet are two further essential features of
the machine's gas pathway, the first providing a rapid supply of pure oxygen and
the second the point of delivery to the breathing system.
The oxygen flush is a control that, when operated,
delivers a high flow of pure oxygen — typically thirty-five to seventy-five litres
per minute — directly from the intermediate-pressure system to the common gas
outlet, bypassing the flowmeters and the vaporisers.
Its purpose is to provide oxygen rapidly,
for instance to fill the breathing system or reservoir bag quickly,
or to deliver oxygen in an emergency.
Because it bypasses the vaporisers, the oxygen flush delivers no anaesthetic agent,
which has a hazard: its inadvertent or prolonged use during anaesthesia can dilute
the anaesthetic, risking awareness,
and its high flow and pressure can cause barotrauma if delivered directly to the
patient's airway, so it must be used judiciously.
It is designed to be non-locking, returning to off when released,
and protected against accidental operation.
The common gas outlet is the single point from which the prepared fresh gas mixture
— metered gases plus volatile agent,
or the flush oxygen — leaves the machine to enter the breathing system.
It is a standardised, often secured connection to prevent accidental disconnection.
In many modern machines the fresh gas is delivered internally to an integrated
breathing system rather than through an external common gas outlet.
So the oxygen flush delivers a high flow of pure oxygen bypassing the flowmeters
and vaporisers, for rapid filling or emergencies,
with the hazards of dilution of anaesthetic and barotrauma,
while the common gas outlet is the standardised point from which the prepared fresh
gas leaves the machine for the breathing system.
Describe the principal safety features built into the anaesthetic machine.
The anaesthetic machine incorporates a layered array of safety features designed to
prevent the delivery of a hypoxic or incorrect mixture and to warn of failures,
and a systematic account of these is central to understanding the machine.
Beginning at the gas supply, the pin index system and non-interchangeable
connectors prevent the wrong gas being connected,
and non-return valves at the cylinder yokes prevent loss of gas from an empty yoke
or backflow.
The oxygen failure warning device, the self-powered Ritchie whistle,
sounds an alarm driven by the failing oxygen itself if the oxygen supply pressure
falls, and a linked protection device cuts off the nitrous oxide and other gases on
oxygen failure so that a hypoxic mixture cannot continue,
often allowing air to be drawn in.
The anti-hypoxia device links the oxygen and nitrous oxide flow controls to
maintain a minimum oxygen proportion. The arrangement of the oxygen flowmeter last
in the manifold minimises hypoxia from a flowmeter leak.
The vaporiser interlock prevents two vaporisers being on together.
The back bar pressure-relief valve protects against excessive pressure and
barotrauma.
An oxygen analyser measures the actual oxygen concentration delivered,
a final independent check, and modern machines add airway pressure alarms,
disconnection alarms, and agent and gas monitoring.
The machine check before use confirms these features function.
So the machine's safety features include the pin index and non-return valves,
the self-powered oxygen failure alarm with gas cut-off,
the anti-hypoxia flow linkage, the oxygen flowmeter placed last,
the vaporiser interlock, the pressure-relief valve,
and the oxygen analyser and monitoring — a layered defence against hypoxia,
incorrect mixtures and barotrauma.
How do modern electronic anaesthetic machines differ from the traditional pneumatic
machine?
Modern electronic anaesthetic machines retain the essential function of the
traditional pneumatic machine but achieve it by electronic and software control,
with integration of ventilation and monitoring,
and understanding the differences is important as such machines are now standard.
The traditional machine is essentially pneumatic and mechanical:
gases are metered by mechanical needle valves and glass rotameters,
vapour is added by a mechanical plenum vaporiser,
and the safety features are mechanical or pneumatic.
The modern machine replaces much of this with electronic control.
Gas flows are metered by electronic flow sensors and controlled by electronic
valves or gas mixers, often with a virtual or electronic flowmeter display rather
than glass rotameters, though a mechanical oxygen flowmeter or backup is usually
retained for use in power failure.
Volatile agent may be added by an electronically controlled injection vaporiser,
such as a cassette system, rather than a mounted plenum vaporiser.
The ventilator is integrated and electronically controlled,
offering sophisticated modes.
Extensive monitoring — of airway pressure, volumes, flows, oxygen, carbon dioxide,
agent concentration and more — is integrated and displayed, with alarms.
The machine performs an automated self-check and leak test.
These machines offer precise control, low-flow anaesthesia,
advanced ventilation and integrated monitoring, but depend on electrical power,
with battery backup and a degree of mechanical fallback for failures.
So modern electronic machines meter gases and add vapour by electronic control and
injection, integrate a sophisticated ventilator and comprehensive monitoring,
and self-check automatically, retaining mechanical oxygen control as a backup —
offering precision and low-flow capability while depending on power,
in contrast to the wholly pneumatic traditional machine.
What hazards and failures are associated with the anaesthetic machine,
and how are they detected?
The anaesthetic machine, being the device that sustains the patient's gas exchange
and anaesthesia, can fail or be misused in ways that are potentially catastrophic,
so the anaesthetist must understand the hazards and how they are detected and
prevented.
Supply failures include the loss or crossover of a gas supply,
mitigated by pin index and non-interchangeable connectors, reserve cylinders,
the oxygen failure alarm, and oxygen analysis;
a hypoxic mixture is guarded against by the anti-hypoxia device and oxygen analyser.
Leaks in the low-pressure system, from a loose vaporiser,
a cracked flowmeter or a disconnection, can cause loss of fresh gas,
dilution or awareness, and are detected by the pre-use leak test and by monitoring
of delivered volumes and concentrations.
Vaporiser hazards include the wrong agent, overfilling,
tipping causing excessive output, and being left on or off inadvertently,
mitigated by agent-specific keyed fillers, the interlock, and agent monitoring.
Pressure hazards include barotrauma from a stuck flush,
an obstruction or a misassembled system,
mitigated by the pressure-relief valve and airway pressure alarms.
Misassembly and misconnection of the breathing system, and failure of valves,
are detected by the check and by capnography and monitoring.
Electrical or power failure of a modern machine is mitigated by battery backup and
mechanical fallback.
The systematic pre-use check, vigilant monitoring with alarms,
and a known plan for failures are the principal defences.
So machine hazards include supply failure and crossover, hypoxic mixtures,
low-pressure leaks, vaporiser errors, barotrauma, misconnection and power failure,
detected and prevented by the engineering safeguards, the pre-use check,
comprehensive monitoring with alarms, and preparedness for failure.
Why is the pre-use check of the machine so important, and what does it encompass?
The pre-use check of the anaesthetic machine is one of the most important safety
routines in anaesthesia, because the machine sustains the patient's ventilation and
anaesthesia and its failure can be rapidly fatal,
and a systematic check following recognised guidelines detects faults before they
reach the patient.
The importance lies in the fact that many machine faults — a crossed gas supply,
a leak, a failed valve, an empty vaporiser,
a misassembled breathing system — are silent until they cause harm,
and the check is the opportunity to find them in advance.
The check, performed at the start of each session with a briefer check before each
case and recorded, encompasses the whole machine.
The gas supplies are checked: pipelines connected to the correct outlets and secure
by a tug test and at adequate pressure; reserve cylinders present,
adequately filled and turned off.
The oxygen supply, oxygen failure alarm,
oxygen flush and oxygen analyser are tested, and the analyser calibrated.
The anti-hypoxia device and flowmeters are checked.
The vaporisers are checked to be seated, filled with the correct agent,
and the interlock functioning, and the system leak-tested with vaporisers on and
off.
The breathing system is checked for correct assembly, patency and no leaks,
and the appropriate system selected; the ventilator and its settings,
the scavenging, and the suction are checked,
and the monitoring confirmed working with alarms set.
A self-test is run on electronic machines.
So the pre-use check is vital because machine faults are often silent until
harmful, and it systematically verifies the gas supplies, oxygen safety devices,
vaporisers, breathing system, ventilator, scavenging, suction and monitoring,
following guidelines and recorded, before the machine is used.
Finally, draw together the principles of the anaesthetic machine as they bear on
practice.
Drawing the station together, the anaesthetic machine is the central instrument of
our specialty, and a thorough understanding of its function,
its components and its safety features is fundamental to safe anaesthesia.
Its essential purpose is to receive medical gases,
to meter and mix them at a controlled flow and a safe oxygen concentration,
to add a measured concentration of volatile agent,
and to deliver the fresh gas safely to the patient.
Organised as high-, intermediate- and low-pressure systems,
it reduces the high cylinder pressure by regulators to a constant working pressure,
meters the gases by flow-control valves and flowmeters arranged to prevent hypoxia,
adds vapour through interlocked agent-specific vaporisers on the back bar,
and delivers the mixture by the common gas outlet,
with an oxygen flush for rapid pure oxygen.
Throughout, a layered system of safety features — pin index and non-return valves,
the self-powered oxygen failure alarm with gas cut-off, the anti-hypoxia linkage,
the oxygen flowmeter placed last, the vaporiser interlock,
the pressure-relief valve and the oxygen analyser — guards against hypoxia,
incorrect mixtures and barotrauma.
Modern machines achieve this by electronic control with integrated ventilation and
monitoring, retaining mechanical fallback. And the systematic pre-use check,
with vigilant monitoring and preparedness for failure,
is the anaesthetist's defence against the silent fault.
So the anaesthetic machine unites the physics of gas supply,
pressure regulation and metering with rigorous engineering safeguards and
disciplined checking to deliver a safe anaesthetic gas mixture — the central
instrument whose mastery is essential to safe practice.
What is the function of the non-return valves at the cylinder yokes,
and of the Bodok seal?
The cylinder yokes, where reserve cylinders attach to the machine,
incorporate two features worth describing — a non-return valve and a sealing washer
— both important to safe function.
Each cylinder is mounted on a yoke that connects it to the machine's high-pressure
system and carries the pin-index pins ensuring only the correct gas cylinder can be
fitted. Within each yoke is a non-return, or one-way, valve.
Its function is to prevent the backward escape of gas: if a yoke is left empty,
or a cylinder is removed, the non-return valve prevents gas from the pipeline or
from another cylinder being lost through the open yoke,
and it prevents one cylinder filling another, or transfilling,
when two are open together.
It thus ensures that gas flows only from the cylinder into the machine,
not the reverse.
To seal the junction between the cylinder valve and the yoke against leakage of
high-pressure gas, a sealing washer called the Bodok seal is used — a
non-combustible washer with a metal rim that makes a gas-tight seal when the
cylinder is tightened into the yoke; it must be present and intact,
as a missing or damaged seal causes a leak.
The yoke is tightened to compress the seal.
So the non-return valves at the cylinder yokes prevent the backward loss of gas
from an empty yoke and prevent transfilling between cylinders,
while the Bodok seal makes a gas-tight,
non-combustible seal between the cylinder valve and the yoke — both essential to
preventing leaks and gas loss in the high-pressure system.
Describe the pressure gauges used on the machine.
The anaesthetic machine carries pressure gauges that display the pressures of the
cylinder and pipeline supplies, and the Bourdon gauge is the type used,
so its principle and purpose merit a brief account.
The gauges allow the anaesthetist to read the pressure of each gas supply — the
high cylinder pressure indicating, for oxygen, the cylinder contents,
and the pipeline pressure confirming an adequate supply at about four bar.
The classic gauge for these pressures is the Bourdon gauge,
which works on a simple mechanical principle:
the gas pressure is admitted into a coiled or curved flexible metal tube,
the Bourdon tube, which is flattened in cross-section;
as the pressure within it rises, the tube tends to uncoil or straighten,
and this movement is transmitted through a mechanical linkage to a pointer that
moves over a calibrated scale, indicating the pressure.
The Bourdon gauge is robust, reliable and suitable for the high pressures of
cylinders. The gauges are colour-coded and labelled for each gas,
and calibrated for the range of pressure concerned.
They allow the cylinder contents to be estimated for gases obeying Boyle's law,
and the pipeline pressure to be confirmed. Modern machines may display these
pressures electronically. The Bourdon gauge principle is also used,
with modification, to measure high flows.
So the machine's pressure gauges, classically the robust mechanical Bourdon gauge
in which a curved flattened tube uncoils with rising pressure to move a pointer,
display the cylinder and pipeline pressures — indicating cylinder contents and
confirming an adequate pipeline supply — colour-coded and calibrated for each gas.
What is the role of flow restrictors and second-stage regulators?
Flow restrictors and second-stage regulators are components concerned with
stabilising the supply pressure to the flowmeters,
and although not present on every machine, their roles are worth understanding.
The pipeline supply, although nominally at four bar,
can be subject to fluctuations and surges in pressure,
and a sudden rise in supply pressure would, without protection,
alter the flow set on the flowmeters or even damage them.
A flow restrictor is a constriction placed in the supply line that limits and
smooths the flow, protecting the flowmeters from pressure surges and reducing the
effect of supply pressure fluctuations on the set flow.
A second-stage pressure regulator, placed downstream of the first-stage regulator
or the pipeline inlet and upstream of the flow-control valves,
further reduces and stabilises the pressure to a lower,
very constant value before the flowmeters.
Its purpose is to make the flow delivered by the flowmeters independent of small
fluctuations in the supply pressure,
so that the set flow remains accurate whether the supply comes from a full or
nearly empty cylinder or a fluctuating pipeline;
it thereby improves the accuracy and stability of metering.
These components contribute to the constancy of the delivered flow,
which is important for accurate anaesthesia.
So flow restrictors limit and smooth the flow to protect the flowmeters from
pressure surges, while second-stage regulators further reduce and stabilise the
pressure before the flow-control valves,
making the metered flow accurate and independent of fluctuations in the supply
pressure.
Explain the minimum oxygen flow and oxygen ratio safety arrangements in more detail.
Beyond the basic anti-hypoxia linkage,
machines incorporate arrangements to guarantee a minimum oxygen delivery and a safe
oxygen ratio, and these safety features deserve fuller description as defences
against hypoxia.
The first is a minimum, or basal, oxygen flow:
many machines are designed so that whenever the machine is switched on,
a minimum flow of oxygen, of the order of a quarter of a litre per minute,
is delivered even if the oxygen flow control is turned fully down,
ensuring that some oxygen always flows and that a wholly hypoxic mixture cannot be
set inadvertently.
The second is the oxygen–nitrous oxide ratio control, the anti-hypoxia device,
which links the two flow controls so that the proportion of oxygen in the
oxygen–nitrous oxide mixture cannot fall below a set minimum,
commonly twenty-five per cent; this is achieved mechanically,
for instance by a chain or gear linking the two flow-control spindles so that
increasing nitrous oxide automatically increases oxygen or limits the nitrous
oxide, or pneumatically by a pressure-sensitive linkage.
In electronic machines, software enforces the minimum ratio.
These arrangements ensure that, regardless of how the controls are set,
the delivered mixture cannot be hypoxic by under-provision of oxygen.
They are complemented by the oxygen analyser,
which measures the actual oxygen concentration as an independent final check,
since the ratio devices control the set flows but the analyser confirms the
delivered gas.
So machines provide a minimum basal oxygen flow ensuring oxygen always flows,
and an oxygen ratio device linking oxygen and nitrous oxide controls to keep the
oxygen proportion above a minimum such as twenty-five per cent, mechanically,
pneumatically or in software, with the oxygen analyser confirming the actual
delivered concentration.
What is the function of the check valve at the common gas outlet?
Some machines incorporate a check valve, or one-way valve,
near the common gas outlet or on the back bar,
and understanding its function illuminates the protection of the vaporiser from
back pressure and the issue of fresh gas flow compensation.
The pressures generated in the breathing system during ventilation,
particularly the positive pressure of inspiration during controlled or manual
ventilation, can be transmitted backwards up the fresh gas line towards the back
bar and vaporiser.
As discussed in the context of vaporisers,
such intermittent back pressure can cause the pumping effect,
episodically altering the vaporiser output.
A check valve placed downstream of the vaporisers, near the common gas outlet,
allows gas to flow only outwards towards the patient and prevents the backward
transmission of the breathing-system pressure to the vaporiser,
thereby reducing the pumping effect and stabilising vaporiser output.
It also prevents backflow of gas into the machine.
However, the presence or absence of such a valve has implications for the
interaction of fresh gas flow with tidal volume delivery by the ventilator — the
fresh gas flow coupling effect — which differs between machines and is handled by
fresh-gas decoupling or compensation in modern designs.
The check valve must not be confused with the non-return valves at the cylinder
yokes.
So the check valve near the common gas outlet permits only outward gas flow,
preventing the backward transmission of breathing-system pressure to the vaporiser
and so reducing the pumping effect and stabilising output,
while its presence bears on how fresh gas flow interacts with ventilator-delivered
tidal volume.
How does the machine continue to function in the event of electrical power failure?
Because modern anaesthetic machines depend substantially on electrical power for
their electronic control, ventilation and monitoring,
their behaviour in a power failure is an important safety consideration,
and machines are designed with backups to maintain essential function.
The first line of defence is an internal battery,
which on loss of mains power automatically maintains the machine's electronic
functions — the ventilator, monitoring and electronic gas control — for a period,
typically of the order of half an hour or more,
allowing the anaesthetic to continue or be safely concluded or the problem
addressed, with an alarm indicating that the machine is running on battery.
Beyond the battery, machines retain a degree of pneumatic and mechanical fallback
that does not require electrical power: critically,
the flow of oxygen and the ability to deliver oxygen by the oxygen flush and,
on many machines, a mechanical oxygen flowmeter and the means to ventilate manually
with the reservoir bag, all function on the gas supply alone,
so that even with complete electrical failure the patient can be oxygenated and
manually ventilated.
The mechanical plenum vaporiser likewise needs no power,
though an electronic injection vaporiser would fail.
The anaesthetist must know how their particular machine behaves in power failure
and be prepared to revert to manual ventilation with oxygen.
So in power failure the machine first runs on an internal battery maintaining
electronic functions for a period with an alarm,
and retains pneumatic and mechanical fallback — oxygen flow, the oxygen flush,
often a mechanical flowmeter, and manual ventilation with the bag — so the patient
can be oxygenated and ventilated, the anaesthetist reverting to manual support as
needed.
Describe the gas-mixing and proportioning arrangements of electronic machines.
In electronic anaesthetic machines,
the metering and mixing of gases is achieved by electronic proportioning systems
rather than by mechanical needle valves and rotameters,
and understanding these arrangements completes the picture of how modern machines
prepare the gas mixture.
In place of the mechanical flow-control valves and glass flowmeter tubes,
the electronic machine uses electronic flow sensors to measure the flow of each gas
and electronically controlled valves to regulate it,
the anaesthetist setting the desired total flow and oxygen concentration through
the user interface rather than adjusting individual mechanical flowmeters.
The control system then proportions the gases to achieve the set oxygen
concentration and total flow, displaying the flows on an electronic,
often graphical, flowmeter representation.
The system enforces the oxygen safety limits in software,
preventing the setting of a hypoxic mixture,
and may automatically adjust to maintain the set oxygen concentration as conditions
change.
Some machines retain a single mechanical oxygen flowmeter and flush as a backup
independent of electronics.
The electronic proportioning allows precise control,
facilitates low-flow and closed-circuit anaesthesia,
and integrates with the machine's monitoring,
so that delivered concentrations are measured and displayed.
The accuracy depends on the calibration of the flow sensors,
checked at the machine's self-test.
So electronic machines meter and mix gases by electronic flow sensors and
controlled valves under software control,
the anaesthetist setting total flow and oxygen concentration,
with software enforcing oxygen safety limits and a mechanical oxygen backup
retained — allowing precise proportioning,
low-flow technique and integration with monitoring.
What maintenance, servicing and electrical safety considerations apply to the
machine?
The anaesthetic machine, as a critical life-support device,
requires regular maintenance and servicing and attention to electrical safety,
and an awareness of these completes a responsible account of the machine.
Regular servicing by trained personnel, at intervals specified by the manufacturer,
is essential to ensure the continued accurate and safe function of the regulators,
flowmeters, valves, vaporiser mountings, ventilator and monitoring,
and to detect wear, leaks and faults before they cause harm;
records of servicing are kept, and the machine should not be used if overdue or
known to be faulty.
The daily and pre-use checks by the anaesthetist, discussed earlier,
complement formal servicing. Vaporisers require periodic recalibration and
servicing.
Electrical safety considerations apply because the machine is an electromedical
device connected to the mains and to the patient through monitoring:
it must conform to electrical safety standards,
with appropriate earthing or isolation to protect against electric shock,
and its monitoring connections to the patient are designed to limit leakage
currents, as we shall discuss under electrical safety.
The machine and its trolley are constructed to be stable and, historically,
antistatic to reduce the risk of sparks in the presence of flammable agents,
though this is less critical with modern non-flammable agents.
Single-use components are not reused,
and infection control is observed for breathing-system parts.
So the machine requires regular manufacturer-specified servicing by trained
personnel with records, complemented by the anaesthetist's pre-use checks and
periodic vaporiser recalibration, and conforms to electrical safety standards with
earthing or isolation and limited leakage currents,
stability and infection control — the maintenance and safety framework for a
critical device.
Distinguish continuous-flow from intermittent-flow anaesthetic machines.
Anaesthetic machines may be broadly distinguished into continuous-flow and
intermittent-flow types, and although the continuous-flow machine is the standard
for theatre anaesthesia, understanding the distinction places it in context.
The continuous-flow machine, which has been the subject of this discussion,
delivers a continuous, steady flow of fresh gas mixture — metered gases and vapour
— to the breathing system throughout the respiratory cycle,
regardless of whether the patient is inspiring or expiring;
the reservoir bag and the breathing system accommodate the difference between this
continuous delivery and the intermittent demand of breathing.
This is the design used for general anaesthesia in the operating theatre,
allowing precise control of a continuous fresh gas composition.
The intermittent-flow machine, by contrast,
delivers gas only when the patient inspires, or on demand,
the flow being triggered by the patient's inspiratory effort through a demand
valve; gas flows during inspiration and ceases during expiration.
Such demand-flow arrangements are seen in some dental anaesthetic and sedation
machines and in the demand valves used for Entonox self-administration and for some
emergency oxygen delivery, where gas is conserved by being delivered only on
inspiration.
The continuous-flow machine offers precise continuous control suited to maintenance
of anaesthesia, while the intermittent-flow demand arrangement conserves gas and
suits self-administration and intermittent use.
So continuous-flow machines deliver a steady fresh gas flow throughout the
respiratory cycle, accommodated by the reservoir,
and are standard for theatre anaesthesia,
whereas intermittent-flow machines deliver gas only on inspiratory demand through a
demand valve, as in some dental, Entonox and emergency-oxygen applications,
conserving gas and suiting self-administration.
Thank you. An excellent and complete account. Let us stop there.
Before we close, here are the take-home messages.
First, The anaesthetic machine receives medical gases,
meters and mixes them at a controlled flow and safe oxygen concentration,
adds measured volatile vapour, and delivers fresh gas to the patient - organised as
high-pressure (variable cylinder pressure up to 137 bar),
intermediate-pressure (regulated about 4 bar,
supplying metering and safety devices) and low-pressure (downstream of flow valves)
systems.
Second, Pressure regulators reduce the high,
falling cylinder pressure to a constant about 4 bar for accurate stable metering
and downstream protection; flowmeters meter each gas,
with the OXYGEN flowmeter placed LAST in the manifold (minimising hypoxia from
leaks) and an anti-hypoxia device linking oxygen and nitrous oxide to keep oxygen
above a minimum (about 25 percent).
Third, The back bar carries interlocked,
agent-specific vaporisers (only one on at a time, e.g.
Selectatec mounting) and a pressure-relief valve;
the oxygen flush gives a high flow of pure oxygen bypassing the vaporisers
(hazards: dilution of anaesthetic/awareness and barotrauma),
and the common gas outlet delivers fresh gas to the breathing system.
Fourth, Layered safety features: pin index and non-return valves,
the self-powered oxygen failure alarm (Ritchie whistle) with cut-off of other
gases, the anti-hypoxia flow linkage, the oxygen flowmeter last,
the vaporiser interlock, the pressure-relief valve,
and the oxygen analyser as an independent check - guarding against hypoxia,
incorrect mixtures and barotrauma.
Fifth, Modern electronic machines meter gases and add vapour by electronic
control/injection with integrated ventilator and monitoring and automated
self-check (retaining mechanical oxygen fallback for power failure);
the systematic, recorded pre-use check is vital because many machine faults are
silent until harmful.
Thank you. That concludes the station.